So we talk about what can they do?
What kind of practices could they go into?
Money.
What kind of money should they ask?
Because there is blatant discrimination on offers to women graduates versus men.
I'd face that when I first came out of school.
I could talk to them about that.
What about raising children and being able to practice and so on?
And by then I was meeting a few of the other women that were in the state, and I could talk about this person did this.
And of course I knew them around the country by then, and we could start to talk about different kinds of options that they would have.
Would you ever get married?
Well, about that time I was getting married, too.
So yeah, you know, and it doesn't have to be to a veterinarian.
You can meet other people out there.
Yes, you can have a career.
Yes, you can practice.
Yes, you can have children.
But in following that up over the years, in fact, I chaired a task force for our state veterinary association that, look, women still are the caregivers for children.
It doesn't matter.
But when you look at this generation, they don't want to work 80-hour weeks anyway, male or female.
So the whole generation is changing.
Based on your relationship with those young women, how did they feel they were being treated by their male student colleagues?
Some of them had some real problems.
And some of them didn't or didn't
recognized it and maybe didn't because the men were changing at that time too.
They were now getting used to women being there.
They were also getting used to women on campus, let's face it.
That was a time when there weren't.
So there were some that would come and they would talk about snide comments.
It's still a question that occasionally will still come up within the last year.
I've still talked about it with women students.
Now it's probably more a man's problem than a woman's problem, but it still does happen.
Because there is a female majority in the... It's about 70%.
I can't tell you exactly.
I gave up on keeping track of it.
I think that nationally it's getting close to three to one, female to male.
And as I understand it, one of the problems that some of the public thinks they see is that I can't get a veterinarian to come out to my ranch anymore.
And that when I was at A&M, I remember that it was fairly easy for the guy down the hall to get admitted to vet medicine.
And my son, Billy Bob, now he's got a good B average.
And he didn't get admitted, but some little old bitty girl from Houston that's never seen a bull, she got admitted.
I remember hearing that a number of times.
And I think I understand the reality.
But there's a problem with that that's not totally the reality.
Women would do those practices.
The problem is it's often a spousal thing because there isn't something for their spouse to do out in...
very, very rural Texas.
In addition, it's an economic thing because many of the ranchers are not willing to pay what it costs to sustain a practice these days.
I suspect that many of them have a false memory of what they used to pay, or they forget that the $5 they gave the veterinarian 40 years ago
translated in today's fee would be a little more than they think it would be.
Right, and a lot of farms and ranches are farther apart.
Not that they're bigger, but they've been consolidated into, and maybe they're farming it instead of raising livestock.
Let's see.
We talked about publications and so forth.
The animal behavior is now well accepted, you think, here.
Yes.
Do you remember any kind of outside interference
in what you were trying to do, attempted by any board member, politician?
Relative to animal behavior?
Mm-hmm.
Or to veterinary medicine?
Either one.
Oh, yes.
There's lots of outside interference.
But you know what?
I'm a stubborn Swede.
And I'd put my head down, and instead of going straight into the brick wall again, I'd do an end runaround, and sure enough, if I look at
the profession of veterinary medicine.
I was the first woman to be on a committee of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
That came because I started being active in the Women's Veterinary Medical Association.
There's a small group of women that had formed an organization.
Shortly after I graduated, I became president of it, because they needed somebody.
Ah, heck, I can organize stuff.
Sure, I'll do it.
So off we go.
And I just charge ahead and do something.
I don't ask.
I can apologize much easier than I can ask permission, so I go on and do it.
If I figure it's not going to hurt anything, so we decided that I was going to run.
I wanted to run for one of the committees, so I did.
And the first time I didn't get elected,
But I came back, and I ran again.
And pretty soon, I'm showing up on FDA is under pressure to get some women.
Well, where do you find women veterinarians?
Well, let's go to the Women's Veterinary Medical Association.
Gee, she happens to be president.
So you get on one of their advisory committees.
And all of a sudden, your CV kind of gets a little fatter and a little fatter.
And in the meantime, you're adding publications to it and so on.
So I decide I'm active in the state.
I've always, if I, I figure I can do more good from within than I can from without.
So I join, I'm active in, and eventually you become good friends with the people there.
Well, you know, I think I need to, I want to run for this office.
So I do.
And I get elected as a district director.
Maybe it's because nobody else wants to run.
Maybe it's because they know my name better than somebody else's.
I don't know.
I don't care.
I get on.
And then apparently I do a good enough job that those at the next level will vote me in at the next level.
So I've, over the years, climbed through the, essentially, been president of almost, or chair of every committee, council, group, organization I belong to, except the American Veterinary Medical Association, and that's coming.
I'm on the executive board right now.
Probably in about three years or so I may run for president.
All right, now one of your colleagues has been the president.
Yes.
Is there any other?
The national, we've had another in Texas but not at A&M.
We have, it's interesting in town because Texas A&M Veterinary College has had more
and for your information, First Presbyterian has had more state VMA presidents than any other town or church in the state.
And we're headed for more national presidents too.
This one, the typist doesn't need to include either.
Up at Missouri, when I was chancellor, we had a real numbskull, bad guy.
They're called curators up there instead of regents.
He's the CEO of Adams Mart Hotels nationally.
And he first insulted all of the women in what you and I used to call home economics.
Up there it's human environmental sciences, a marvelous dean.
And he, one day at a meeting, he was saying, why in the world do we even continue that?
All they do is teach cooking and sewing.
Well, within a few weeks, he heard enough that he backed away.
And then he said, and veterinary medicine is a waste of money.
All they are are poodle groomers.
Well, that was the finest thing that had ever happened to veterinary medicine in Missouri because every veterinarian came alive, and they got together.
Well, I went to him, and I said, isn't it unusual, sir,
that the president this year of the AVMA is a graduate of this vet school, the chairman of the executive committee is a graduate of this vet school, and Miss America is a senior fourth-year student to be in this vet school.
And he'll like, oh, oh, oh.
Like I've always thought that
Too many people fail to realize in the olden days what a real professional assignment.
There are many that still do not realize that it's a profession.
They think you go and get a certificate after a couple weeks.
I mean, that mindset still does occur.
In all of these many off-campus activities, have you ever been called upon to testify before the legislative committee?
Yes.
Describe that.
The rabies vaccine and the rabies issue in the state is always a concern in veterinary medicine.
I'm trying to think.
It's probably been about, let's see, I was president that year, so it would have been 94 or spring of 95 when the legislature met.
There was a senator who was proposing that rabies vaccine be allowed over the counter so that anybody could use it.
And that was in part a response to the coyote rabies scare that was really spreading throughout the state.
And his argument was that when he was a county agent, he had been allowed at that time to vaccinate against rabies and he felt he did a very good job.
Well, there are a number of reasons that the veterinary profession has a concern about OTC, rabies vaccines, mainly that they don't give it or they don't give it properly and therefore it doesn't work.
And now you've got animals that are not protected that people think are.
So we were fighting very hard to keep rabies vaccine in the hands of veterinarians only.
So we went to testify in front of this committee.
And I was president, so that's my job.
And we brought in a couple of public health people, very, very well-respected individuals.
And finally, after hearing about oil well leases and on and on and on, it came our turn.
So we get in in front of the Senate committee.
We'll get in there and we start testifying.
And during the time when the veterinarians were speaking, every member on that committee would turn sideways, was talking to their neighbor.
They paid absolutely no attention whatsoever, hardly even acknowledged their presence.
Then the senator had brought in one of his constituents who had gone through the rabies series.
He'd lost a couple cows to rabies and he had
been exposed and had gone through that and how terrible it was the whole time that man talked everybody just stood and stared at him it was just oh feed me feed me more of this stuff well it was very obvious we weren't going to get it stopped at that level so we had to work through the state association to get it stopped uh as it hit the house
But it was a, it was an interesting experience.
Very good political experience, which obviously as a faculty member here I can't take advantage of.
But it's something, at least I understand how state government works.
Now I want to pick on you as an advisor.
What advice, looking at the present, what advice would you give to the departmental, you're in small animal medicine, what advice would you give to leadership of small animal medicine looking to the future of the department?
With each new faculty member that comes in,
Look for balance within the total program, not necessarily within the individual.
Allow the people that you have to succeed at what they do.
You become the roadblock between the higher-ups and the faculty.
Because good people are here, good people will come.
Allow them to succeed at what they can do.
Don't ask them to do the things that they don't do well.
And what advice, then the dean?
To the dean, the same thing.
Nurture the department chairs and allow them to do, allow them to
Have their departments flourish without picking favorite departments.
You can pick favorite programs.
That's something that you should do.
But pick those who understand balance within the individuals, but within programs overall.
And pick those that are going to, because of the system that we have at A&M,
I would rather see deans pick department chairs that are administrators rather than researchers or teachers or academicians in whatever sense, because their role changes.
As far as you are aware, are there any programs in veterinary medicine that A&M ought to reach out and bring here, or any new areas of study that A&M ought to attack?
The whole profession changes over time.
Academics is very slow to change.
It is our shackle.
It is important for deans and department chairs to look at ways to change the programs, including the curriculum.
to meet the needs for the present and the future and get rid of some of the deadwood as far as programs, curriculum, courses that are not necessarily current.
We need to bring in the dynamic individuals that can teach those areas.
You bring them in because they're teachers.
Are there any areas that you think need more attention in the curriculum and some that need less?
If we look at the big items for the future of our profession,
Public health, I never ever thought I would say this, but public health is extremely important.
The food issues that the US exports to Europe and around the world are big issues.
Food safety is a big one, but we've got to have the dynamic people
who can make that area exciting, not the dry, boring lectures of the past.
We need to look at the new technologies and so on that are coming in.
How can we incorporate those in?
We don't need the history of why every little bug is called what it is.
We need to know how to approach
microbiology, physiology, in the broad depth of understanding, not in the minutiae of the understanding.
Let's get rid of minutiae.
Some of it's important, but I hate to say it to a historian, a lot of the history is important if you specialize in the area, but not if you're trying to get out to make a living.
Would you have any advice for the university administration relative to veterinary medicine?
Pick the best people for your administrators and get off their backs.
Is the enrollment number here, is that a comparatively appropriate number?
Yeah, the facilities are designed for the number of approximately 120, 830 per class.
You can go a little bit higher, but that's going to really crimp the basic science area.
That's the area that is
probably affected the most by increases.
The clinics can probably use more.
Part of the clinics are unfortunately driven by student power.
I personally would like to see a 13 block
year, 13 four-week blocks, which means we don't have Christmas, we don't have spring break, we go year around.
So you take your vacation when you're off, when those things come up.
That would keep the clinic up and going.
This up and down fluctuation on the clinic is terrible.
It's not good for clients, it's not good for the animals we serve, and it probably,
It isn't really good for students because if you're coming, if you're on a block just before Christmas, you're not going to get much out of it.
You've got state boards, you're gearing down to get numbers of animals out of here.
We don't offer the consistent service we could if we were up 13 months, 13 blocks out of a year.
What has it meant to the College of Retinier Medicine to have a new medical school across the street?
The college has benefited because of the ability to do collaborative, primarily research.
Good.
Can you think of it?
There are a number of people that have joint projects with researchers over there.
And our GI lab, our GI people are one that come to mind.
It probably has helped, I'll say, the basic science area more than the clinical area, although certainly some of the clinical people have been involved.
It has brought money into the medical sciences library that has made that an even better facility than it was in the past.
Those are the biggest areas that I can think of.
From the actual clinical standpoint, there isn't a lot of exchange there.
But they've been good neighbors as far as your country?
Oh, absolutely.
Have you ever considered leaving?
Have I ever considered leaving?
Any serious offers that you considered?
I have had a lot of offers, more for deanships than anything else.
And part of that's affirmative action.
I know that.
And I have looked at it, and there was a time when I was very, very stressed here and not getting support by the departmental administration until my position was moved.
Then I was a happy person again.
I have a tendency to stress myself sometimes too much, so then, ooh, should I leave?
Well, no.
In to truly, seriously consider moving, probably no.
I've toyed with the idea at times.
It looks really good at times.
But I'm really a Texan at heart by now.
So you're a convert?
Oh, I was probably Texan before I came.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Meaning you decided you were going to like it?
No.
Number one, I could like living most anywhere.
There are beautiful places, there are wonderful things about everything.
I hate snow, however, now.
I've always hated cold.
But my mentality of people are valuable, politeness is appropriate, students are wonderful,
Don't be in a hurry.
That's a Texas way of life.
And those are values that I have always had.
So I probably have always been Texan at heart.
What advice would you give to a new female faculty member today in veterinary medicine?
Get research dollars if you're going to survive in the system.
And unfortunately, I hate to say it, as much as you love teaching, the first years until you get tenure, that's not got, that cannot be your highest priority.
Would you give her any, that's the advice you'd give to any new faculty member?
Absolutely.
Or any advice you'd give to her as a woman in this college?
Yeah.
In addition, I would probably add that you're going to, if you are thinking about raising a family at this point in time, you might have to think very hard about how that could impact your professional advancement.
Unfortunately, hopefully, if I were going to speak to administrators, we've got to look at options for the newer generation that we did not have.
And that is very hard to do.
There are a number of large corporations that are looking at keeping people on this part-time,
Giving them the full benefits but having them part-time rather than having to bring in new and constantly retraining.
That's a model we better look at.
We better look at prolonging the promotion tenure process because faculty women with families have to, in this day and age, they have to be available to their children.
Society demands it, and the next generation is demanding it.
If we want the best as our faculty, we've got to be able to offer those things to them without punishment for doing it.
In general, you seem positive about the quality of the program here today.
The Vision 2020 is the dream for A&M to be in the top 10 publics.
We're certainly in the top 10 in veterinary medicine.
What should the goal be for veterinary medicine 20 years from now?
The goal for veterinary medicine 20 years from now needs to be
State of the art, not antiquated.
It needs to be insightful for what is still coming.
It needs to have addressed the concerns of a new generation.
And it needs to remain active and maintain its one absolute best strength in the whole world, and that's teaching.
As you think about it today in the merit, hopefully promotions and tenure and salary are done on a merit basis, is there an appropriate mixture in the judgment for teaching, research, and service?
I can't speak lately because I truly do not know.
My gut feeling is, and I can really only speak for this department, I have not been to look at the salary book in I don't know how many years now.
My feeling is, and in knowing how past department heads have worked and in listening to what our current department head says, there is a true effort to look at merit of all types.
And that's real hard to quantify.
I know from an administrator standpoint, it is real hard to give a point for the, is this worth one point and this worth two points?
It's very, very difficult.
But in the people that I've seen,
I've seen an honest, dedicated effort to do their best to try and do that.
Oh, good, good, good.
I'm getting near the end now.
How did you become a part of Aggie spirit?
What were your first encounters with some Aggie traditions and so forth?
My first encounter was bonfire.
It's interesting to watch the progress.
The first year that I was down, my mother came down for Thanksgiving.
And I'd heard a bonfire, yeah, it's a little pile of sticks out in a parking lot somewhere.
And then I thought, oh my goodness sakes.
Well, by the time my mother got home, she sat next to an Aggie on her flight out of here.
She was absolutely convinced that her daughter was in the absolute best place in the whole wide world.
Aggie spirit reigns supreme.
Yes, mother, okay.
Over time, looking at those traditions, I married an Aggie.
who was, he called himself a two percenter, but he was an Aggie.
He truly was an Aggie.
You go to the traditions, you go to, I went to, the first time I went to Silver Taps, it was like, wow, we didn't do this at Minnesota.
And then I heard about muster.
I didn't go to muster for, well, until my husband passed away, I didn't go to muster.
And then I said, you know, I have to go to muster because he needed that.
And I got to thinking,
There's not another school in the world that cares about the people that graduated there.
This year, I did muster in Albuquerque.
I've done 25 musters.
And at the end where you light the candles, they varied it just a little.
They didn't light any of the candles.
They called all the muster.
And then they turned on a little bit of a spotlight.
Lights were out everywhere else.
And here are 12 candles.
And they called the names of those 12 youngsters.
And ooh, was that touching.
Because one of the boys from Albuquerque was a red pot.
And across the hallway from him in the dormitory was one of the boys who died and he was in his outfit.
So he could speak truly from the heart of what it all meant.
I was up in Chicago at our executive board meeting.
when I heard about this thing, and boy, all of a sudden, I had my face glued.
And we started talking about the ones that were lost and so on.
And it was real hard.
There was one other Aggie who's there.
And it was real hard for the others to understand the impact that it had.
I think it took an Aggie to truly understand the depth of that reaction.
And so I'd keep sending out stuff, all the tributes and stuff, and I'd just send it out, here, this is what we're about.
This is what we're about.
Because coming as a new PhD from Rice in 1959, I'd seen Aggies misbehave at Rice football games, and I knew they were some kind of backward group, and if I didn't get stuck there more in two or three years, and I tell muster audiences, some of us are converts.
Let's see, what creates all this spirit?
Well, you can always say it's a shared relationship, shared experiences.
And in part, that's true.
And it's experiences that are handed down.
It's not just on the campus.
And the traditions have a big role to play in that.
But I think more than anything, and I've heard this from students that I've had, when they leave,
They know they were loved by the faculty here.
They had good experiences, and students should.
They should be sheltered from everything else.
But they realized that the faculty really loved them.
Now, in the students in the professional program here who got their undergraduate degree somewhere else, do you see them being inundated with Aggie spirit?
Oh, yes.
And I will tell you, when we go to our national meeting, there are always alumni receptions.
Every school has their alumni reception.
Nobody else has Yale practice.
Now, one of the immediate past student president just graduated from our veterinary program.
And she brought one of her colleagues with.
And I tapped the girl on the shoulder and I said, bet you don't have that at your school.